73. Apibendrinimas laisvė nuo abejingumo.

To conclude this inquiry.
Padaryti išvadą šis tyrimas.

into human liberty.
į žmogaus laisvę.

which, as it stood before.
kuris, kaip tai stovėjo prieš.

I myself.
aš pats.

from the beginning fearing.
iš prasidėjimo bijau.

and a very judicious friend of mine.
ir labai protingas draugas nuo manęs.

since the publication.
nuo publikacijos.

suspecting to have some mistake in it.
įtardamas turėti kažkokią klaidą viduje tai.

though he could not.
nors jis galėjo ne.

particularly show it me.
individualiai parodyti tai man.

I was put upon.
aš buvau padėtas link.

a stricter review of this chapter.
griežtesnės apžvalgos nuo šios dalies.

Wherein lighting upon.
Kame apšvietimas link.

a very easy.
labai lengvas.

and scarce observable slip.
ir vargu pastebimas paslydimas.

I had made.
aš turėjau pagaminti.

in putting one.
viduje padėjimo vieno.

seemingly indifferent word.
iš pažiūros abejingas žodis.

for another.
dėl kitokio.

that discovery opened to me.
tas atradimas atidarė man.

this present .
šį dabartinį.

which here.
kuris čia.

in this second edition.
viduje šio antro leidinio.

I submit to the learned world.
aš pateikiau mokytam pasauliui.

and which.
ir kuris.

in short, is this.
viduje trumpumo, yra šis.

Liberty is a power.
Laisvė yra galia.

to act or not to act.
veikti arba ne veikti.

according as the mind directs.
pagal kaip intelektas nurodo.

A power to direct.
Galia nurodyti.

the operative faculties to motion or rest.
veikiančias galias judėjimui arba ramybei.

in particular instances.
viduje individualių atvejų.

is that which we call the will. 
yra tai kurį mes vadiname valia.

That which in the train.
Kad kuris viduje grandinės.

of our voluntary actions.
nuo mūsų valingų veiksmų.

determines the will.
nustato valią.

to any change.
bet kuriam pokyčiui.

of operation is some present uneasiness.
nuo veikimo yra kažkoks esantis nepasitenkinimas.

which is.
kuris yra.

or at least.
arba mažiausiai.

is always accompanied.
yra visada lydimas.

with that of desire.
su tuo nuo troškimo. 

Desire is always moved.
Troškimas yra visada judintas.

by evil.
per blogį.

to fly it.
skristi tai.

because a total freedom.
kadangi totali laisvė.

from pain.
iš skausmo.

always makes a necessary part.
visada pagamina būtiną dalį.

of our happiness.
nuo mūsų laimės.

but every good.
bet kiekvienas geras.

nay, every greater good.
dargi, kiekvienas didesnis gėris.

does not constantly move desire.
daro ne pastoviai judina troškimą.

because it may not make.
kadangi tai gali ne gaminti.

or may not be taken to make.
arba gali ne būti paimtas pagaminti.

part of our happiness. 
dalis nuo mūsų laimės.

For all that we desire.
Juk viskas kad mes trokštame.

is only to be happy. 
yra tik būti laimingu.

But, though this general desire of happiness.
Bet, nors šis bendras troškimas nuo laimės.

operates constantly and invariably.
veikia pastovai ir nekintamai.

yet the satisfaction.
vis dėl to patenkinimas.

of any particular desire.
nuo bet kurio individualaus noro.

can be suspended.
gali būti sustabdytas.

from determining the will.
iš nustatymo valia.

to any subservient action.
bet kuriam pavaldžiam veiksmui.

till we have.
iki mes turime.

maturely examined.
brandžiai ištyrę.

whether the particular apparent good.
ar individualus atrodantis gėris.

which we then desire.
kurį mes tada trokštame.

makes a part of our real happiness.
gamina dalį nuo mūsų tikros laimės.

or be consistent or inconsistent with it.
arba baus atitinkantis arba neatitinkantis su tai.

The result of our judgment.
Rezultatas nuo mūsų sprendimo.

upon that examination.
link kad tyrimo.

is what ultimately.
yra kas galiausiai.

determines the man.
nustato žmonės.

who could not be free.
kas galėtų ne būti laisvi.

if his will.
jeigu jo valia.

were determined.
buvo nustatyta.

by anything.
per bet ko.

but his own desire.
bet jo savo troškimo.

guided by his own judgment.
vadovauto per jo savą sprendimą.

I know that liberty.
aš žinau kad laisvė.

by some.
per kai kuriuos.

is placed.
yra patalpinta.

in an indifferency of the man.
viduje abejingumo nuo žmogaus.

antecedent to the determination of his will.
pirmtaką nustatymui nuo jo valios.

I wish they.
aš linkiu jie.

who lay so much stress.
kas guldo tiek daug streso.

on such an antecedent indifferency.
ant tokio pirmatakinio abejingumo.

as they call it.
kaip jie vadina tai.

had told us plainly.
turėjo pasakę mums aiškiai.

whether this supposed indifferency.
ar šis tariamas abejingumas.

be antecedent to the thought and judgment.
būtų pirmtakas minčiai ir sprendimui.

of the understanding.
nuo supratimo.

as well as to the decree of the will.
kaip gerai kaip nutarimas nuo valios.

For it is pretty hard to state it between them, in other words, immediately after the judgment of the understanding, and before the determination of the will: 
because the determination of the will immediately follows the judgment of the understanding: 
and to place liberty in an indifferency, antecedent to the thought and judgment of the understanding, seems to me to place liberty in a state of darkness, wherein we can neither see nor say anything of it; 
at least it places it in a subject incapable of it, no agent being allowed capable of liberty, but in consequence of thought and judgment. 

I am not nice about phrases, and therefore consent to say with those that love to speak so, that liberty is placed in indifferency, but it is an indifferency which remains after the judgment of the understanding, yea, even after the determination of the will: 
and that is an indifferency not of the man, (for after he has once judged which is best, that is to say to do or forbear, he is no longer indifferent,) but an indifferency of the operative powers of the man, which remaining equally able to operate or to forbear operating after as before the decree of the will, are in a state, which, if one pleases, may be called indifferency; 
and as far as this indifferency reaches, a man is free, and no further: 
for example I have the ability to move my hand, or to let it rest; 
that operative power is indifferent to move or not to move my hand. 

I am then, in that respect perfectly free; 
my will determines that operative power to rest: 
I am yet free, because the indifferency of that my operative power to act, or not to act, still remains; 
the power of moving my hand is not at all impaired by the determination of my will, which at present orders rest; 
the indifferency of that power to act, or not to act, is just as it was before, as will appear, if the will puts it to the trial, by ordering the contrary. 

But if, during the rest of my hand, it be seized with a sudden palsy, the indifferency of that operative power is gone, and with it my liberty; 
I have no longer freedom in that respect, but am under a necessity of letting my hand rest. 

On the other side, if my hand be put into motion by a convulsion, the indifferency of that operative faculty is taken away by that motion; 
and my liberty in that case is lost, for I am under a necessity of having my hand move. 

I have added this, to show in what sort of indifferency liberty seems to me to consist, and not in any other, real or imaginary.
