71. We can change the agreeableness or disagreeableness in things.
71. Mes galime pakeisti malonumą arba nemalonumą viduje daiktų.

The last inquiry.
Paskutinis paklausimas.

therefore, concerning this matter is.
todėl, liečiantis šį reikalą yra.

Whether it be.
Ar tai būtų.

in a man's power.
viduje žmogaus galios.

to change the pleasantness and unpleasantness.
pakeisti malonumą ir nemalonumą.

that accompanies.
kad lydi.

any sort of action?
bet kurios rūšies nuo veiksmo.

And as to that.
Ir kaip tam.

it is plain.
tai yra aišku.

in many cases.
viduje daugumos atvejų.

he can. 
jis gali.

Men may and should.
Žmonės gali ir turi.

correct their palates.
pataisyti jų gomurius.

and give relish.
ir duoti pasigardžiavimą.

to what either has.
kam arba turi.

or they suppose.
arba jie taria.

has none. 
turi jokio.

The relish of the mind.
Pasigardžiavimas nuo intelekto.

is as various.
yra kaip įvairus.

as that of the body.
kaip kad nuo kūno.

and like that too.
ir panašiai kad taip pat.

may be altered.
gali būti pakeistas.

and it is a mistake.
ir tai yra klaida.

to think that men.
galvoti kad žmonės.

cannot change the displeasingness.
negali pakeisti nemalonumą.

or indifferency.
arba abejingumą.

that is in actions.
kad yra viduje veiksmų.

into pleasure and desire.
į malonumą ir troškimą.

if they will do.
jeigu jei darys.

but what is in their power.
bet kas yra viduje jų galios.

A due consideration.
Tinkamas apsvarstymas.

will do it.
padarys tai.

in some cases.
viduje kai kurių atvejų.

and practice, application.
ir praktika, taikymas.

and custom in most.
ir įprotis viduje daugumos.

Bread or tobacco may be neglected where they are shown to be useful to health, because of an indifferency or disrelish to them; 
reason and consideration at first recommends, and begins their trial, and use finds, or custom makes them pleasant. 

That this is so in virtue too, is very certain. 

Actions are pleasing or displeasing, either in themselves, or considered as a means to a greater and more desirable end. 

The eating of a well-seasoned dish, suited to a man's palate, may move the mind by the delight itself that accompanies the eating, without reference to any other end;
to which the consideration of the pleasure there is in health and strength (to which that meat is subservient) may add a new gusto, able to make us swallow an ill-relished potion. 

In the latter of these, any action is rendered more or less pleasing, only by the contemplation of the end, and the being more or less persuaded of its tendency to it, or necessary connexion with it: 
but the pleasure of the action itself is best acquired or increased by use and practice. 

Trials often reconcile us to that, which at a distance we looked on with aversion; 
and by repetitions wear us into a liking of what possibly, in the first essay, displeased us. 

Habits have powerful charms, and put so strong attractions of easiness and pleasure into what we accustom ourselves to, that we cannot forbear to do, or at least be easy in the omission of, actions, which habitual practice has suited, and thereby recommends to us. 

Though this be very visible, and every one's experience shows him he can do so; 
yet it is a part in the conduct of men towards their happiness, neglected to a degree, that it will be possibly entertained as a paradox, if it be said, that men can make things or actions more or less pleasing to themselves; 
and thereby remedy that, to which one may justly impute a great deal of their wandering. 

Fashion and the common opinion having settled wrong notions, and education and custom ill habits, the just values of things are misplaced, and the palates of men corrupted. 

Pains should be taken to rectify these; 
and contrary habits change our pleasures, and give a relish to that which is necessary or conducive to our happiness. 

This every one must confess he can do; 
and when happiness is lost, and misery overtakes him, he will confess he did amiss in neglecting it, and condemn himself for it; 
and I ask every one, whether he has not often done so?
